We can't live a full, dignified life
with the ability to question authority,
to test ideas, to blow off steam if we
don't have private communication. You
can't do military strategy, you can't do
human rights work, you can't do
journalism, full stop.
>> Meredith Whittaker, tech boss and
defender of privacy. I got the
impression that by the end of your time
at Google, you were kind of a thorn in
management's side.
>> It wasn't Meredith versus Google. There
is a groundswell [music] of sentiment
within tech and outside of tech that is
concerned with how do we make sure
[music] that we are collectively
governing this powerful technology so
that those who would do harm with it
aren't those who are in control.
>> From Bloomberg Weekend, [music] this is
the Michelle Hussain Show.
From social media bans to AI and
military strikes and the destruction of
jobs, debates about tech are all around
us every day. I'm old enough to remember
the '90s and the emergence of the
companies that today we call Big Tech.
Back then, they were largely seen as
benign. They were full of exciting
features that would connect us to people
around the world and they were free to
access. Today, of course, the picture is
much more complex. But even so, how many
of us really think hard enough about how
we use tech, the products we choose, and
what those companies get out of us?
Well, this conversation is with Meredith
Whittaker, a tech boss who is different
from her peers. Partly because her
product, the messaging app Signal, is a
nonprofit and also because it has a deep
and she says unshakable promise to
barely collect your data, let alone sell
it. If you're not a user of Signal, but
you know you've heard about it
somewhere, it's probably because of the
moment last year when the then US
National Security Advisor added a
journalist to what should have been a
classified group chat about military
action in Yemen. It became known as
Signal Gate. So, that's some of the
background. But, as Meredith Whittaker
came into this studio, there was a live
issue in the UK. The government's plans
to make it impossible for under 18s to
take or share nude images on their
phones. She's got views on the principle
of that and on how workable it is, as
you'll hear. But, I had questions, too,
on whether everyone has the right to be
private. What about crime, abuse,
terrorism? Your views and questions are
welcome on this, by the way. The email
is michelleshow@bloomberg.net,
and the broader context is, as ever, in
the illustrated written version of this,
which you can read at
bloomberg.com/michelle.
Ultimately, I hope you find this
conversation as compelling as I did,
because Meredith Whittaker is able to
see the irony in her world, to bring out
the moments of humor, as well as make us
think.
Meredith,
>> I guess I would just love to start by
asking
about your own journey towards what you
do now, because you worked in Big Tech
at Google for more than a decade.
>> Yeah.
>> Was there a moment in that period where
you really started to think differently
about privacy and data? A moment you can
identify that's kind of critical in in
the development of your story.
>> I have considered that question. Is
there a point where I tripped over
something or a revelation happened? You
know,
Athena was birthed from the forehead of
Zeus and suddenly there's
insight. I don't think it was a moment.
I come out of an non-traditional
background for somebody working in the
tech industry. I studied literature, I
studied rhetoric. I was always an arts
kid and that's still where I as a human
being really live. I I love it.
And so I was
calibrated to perhaps ask different
questions or just, you know, pursue
different inquiries.
But I think it was it was over time
beginning to understand
Google's business models, the political
economic forces that were animating the
company.
After coming in as basically a novice, I
did not pursue computer science in
school. I was not interested in tech. I
did not get, you know, a Commodore 64
when I was a kid and everything took off
from there and I loved computers, right?
Which, you know, the classic origin
story. Um
and so I had to ask really, really
fundamental questions. Like, what is a
server?
>> Would I be Would I be right in thinking
of you as a bit of a contrarian or maybe
a rebel? I I know that there was a key
moment in your time at Google where you
organized colleagues against a Pentagon
contract that you realized was
was being signed.
>> I wouldn't adopt those terms myself. You
know, I am somebody who
thinks it's really important to maintain
the dignity of my analysis.
Like, if something is true, if there is
empirical evidence supporting a
conclusion, if we can look at the map
and clearly see that there's a problem
on the road ahead,
then
I am not somebody who's going to go
along to get along with a convenient
delusion. Those things, once I see them,
I'm not going to veer away or pretend
that they don't exist, even if I have to
take steps that might be scary or, you
know, against the grain to do that.
>> got I got the impression that by the end
of your time at Google, you were kind of
a thorn in management's side. You were
organizing walkouts on other issues,
ethics issues, and they they saw you as
a problem.
>> Well, people who would like to put
the goals of infinite growth, infinite
revenue, profit above
the reality of the harms or the problems
or the choppy seas on the road ahead
don't like people who point that out.
But, I do want to sort of frame that it
wasn't wasn't Meredith versus
Google.
This was a a groundswell
from
thousands of people.
>> Yeah, there were a lot The walkouts and
the walkouts at the time were people
came out in in big numbers to protest
different things.
>> today. DeepMind
employees just unionized, concerned
about the application of that technology
for harmful purposes. You have OpenAI
employees beginning to organize or
that's being reported in preparation for
the IPO. There is a sort of groundswell
of sentiment within tech now and outside
of tech that is concerned
with, you know, the fundamental question
that I don't think can be avoided by
anyone. How do we make sure that we are
collectively governing this powerful
technology
so that those who would do harm with it
aren't those who are in control. How do
we scrutinize it? How do we put
guardrails on it? How do we determine
where it's used, where it's not used,
how it's developed, and what the goals
of that development are? Those are
fundamental question that every world
leader, every government, every
community considering a data center
needs to be looking at. And where the
leverage for governance, where that
fulcrum exists, is an open question
given the bipolar tech world we live in
and the volatile geopolitical
environment we're in. So
>> fact that the tech world seems to be
becoming ever more powerful, not least
with the amount of interest in the IPOs.
>> Absolutely.
>> I want to take a moment to really
understand what you do at Signal. The
core promise is end-to-end encryption,
which means only the sender or receiver
can see the actual content of the
messages. So, how is that different from
WhatsApp, which also has the same
promise?
>> Well, the core promise of Signal
is that in the digital world where
almost every micro action is surveilled,
turned into data, processed in models,
sold to advertisers, sold to data
brokers, etc., etc.
we preserve
the fundamental human right to private
communication.
Full stop. Which has existed for
hundreds of thousands of years. That was
the norm. If you and I are talking, that
conversation is gone once we are done
talking and part ways.
And we have moved into a world where
that ground has shifted dramatically out
from under us and that is no longer
true. And we think that, you know, it is
considered a fundamental human right for
a very good reason. We can't live a
full, dignified life with the ability to
question authority, to have different
relationships with people, to test
ideas, to blow off steam if we don't
have private communication. You can't do
military strategy. You can't do human
rights work. You can't do journalism.
Full stop.
So, Signal provides that in as robust a
way as we can. We developed the
encryption protocol, the Signal
Protocol, that moved the field forward.
In 2013, we introduced that to the world
and that is the core of our offering.
That protects the message content on
Signal. What you send only goes between
sender and receiver. Only the people
you're talking to know it. WhatsApp
licenses that protocol from us and they
also apply it to many of their their
messages that are sent. WhatsApp for
business is excluded from this in in
many cases, but they protect message
content. So, what you type, what you say
is end-to-end encrypted. They can't see
it.
Only the sender and receiver.
However, you have to look at privacy
beyond simply the message content and
this is where there are very fundamental
differences between WhatsApp and Signal.
Signal also applies encryption to
protect what is called metadata, but
that is extremely intimate and extremely
revealing data. It's your profile photo,
your name, who you talk to, when you
talk to them, who's in your groups, how
often you chat, when did you text your
oncologist, when did you text your
therapist, when did you text your
lawyer, when did you text someone or
your best friend, all of that
information. So, WhatsApp does collect
that.
We don't. We go out of our way to
collect as close to no data as possible
and we make that open source.
>> Is it really that revealing, the other
data, the the message data? If someone
can see that I
wake up at 6:00 in the morning and I
send a lot of messages at that time and
they might even know who I'm messaging,
my mother, my colleagues, or people in
other time zones. Is Is that really so
revealing of me?
>> Oh, it absolutely can be. Are you
messaging your FBI contacts because you
want to be a source?
Are you messaging a whistleblower
attorney? Because you found corruption
in your workplace and want to report
that. Are you messaging a divorce
lawyer?
Are you messaging an oncologist?
>> Yeah, but but what I mean is again, it's
like WhatsApp for example could see oh
that other person is an oncologist or
that other person is in law enforcement
or it or is it source, but again they
can't see beyond that what the actual
content is that I'm saying.
>> Well, no, not you know assuming that's
not on WhatsApp for business.
However, I think we have to expand
beyond simply the the application
and look at WhatsApp being owned by
Meta, the parent company.
Meta is a massive data collecting
entity. Surveillance advertising is the
heart of their business model.
So, okay, you message your oncologist.
All right, let's join that data with all
of the other data we have in hand. We
buy credit data from data brokers. We
have Facebook data. We have Instagram
data. And we have powerful AI models
that can find patterns and search across
this data.
>> ads for cancer drugs on
Instagram? Is Is that what you're
suggesting?
>> Let's cuz the surveillance advertising
is a very inflammatory way to put it.
Well, I mean it's a technical
descriptor, right? It's targeted
advertising based on the collection of
data that reveals or reportedly reveals
certain
qualities of of you. Let's take another
example. You're messaging a a
whistleblower attorney.
And it's very high high risk. And you
know, the corruption that you found is
is extreme.
So, they know, you know, okay, this is
this is whistleblower aid, an
organization that that helps with that.
Okay, it started messaging. Now, okay,
this is that contact. Okay, well, you
know,
what could they do with that? What could
they reveal? Could that be subpoenaed?
Could that be revealed to your employer?
The fundamental answer is that yes, this
data is extremely revealing. It reveals
patterns about you. We could
hypothesize, but we we know already that
there's a
a woman who went to jail in the US
because Meta turned over DMs on Facebook
Messenger between her and her daughter
that showed her helping her daughter
access and deal with the aftermath of
reproductive care in the state of
Nebraska.
>> Do you find it frustrating then when you
see people
um not care about their privacy? Some
people wouldn't be in even be aware, but
people who are aware, but just think
this is the price I pay for these
platforms being free at the point of
use.
Or maybe younger people especially who
just think that there's nothing really
in their life that they would mind being
in the public domain.
>> Yeah, I find it frustrating when the
argument that no one cares about privacy
is leveraged by these firms to justify
what they're doing. I don't actually
find it frustrating when people who
really in my view have little choice
say, you know, hey, I can't do anything
about this. I'm going to, you know,
delete that from my long list of worries
because I don't feel that I am empowered
to act on this.
I actually don't believe that people
don't care about privacy, but I believe
that the stakes are very obscure and
we're all living in a world where we
have dishes to do. We have bills to pay.
We have things that are right on our
doorstep to deal with and thinking about
data flows and privacy legislation is
probably pretty far down on our list of
concerns.
>> You had two big moments in the growth of
Signal, both of which I remember. um,
2013 when Edward Snowden used it and
trusted it to talk to journalists about
US government surveillance. And the
second was Signal Gate last year when
a journalist was added to a supposedly
highly classified Trump administration
discussion on on military action. When
the second happened, what did you think?
This is a like a great advertisement for
Signal cuz it's secure enough for the US
government or
>> I thought, "Whoa. What's going on this
morning? This is This is an interesting
story."
>> [laughter]
>> Um, it, you know, the article hit my
feed the same time it hit anyone else's
feed. And I think
I had to read it twice to really let it
sink in because it it read almost like a
telenovela.
What I didn't anticipate after reading
it initially was that Signal would
become a main character. And that it
would become a story about Signal.
And what I was primarily concerned about
is it, you know, suddenly Signal was
being reported on, spoken about by, you
know, millions of people who weren't
familiar with the intricacies of
encrypted messaging or the, you know,
technology itself.
And I wanted to prevent misinformation
that could hinder Signal or misinform
people who, you know, often need to
choose Signal in life or death
consequences.
>> was essentially about human frailty.
Someone who shouldn't have been added to
that chat being added. And your worry
was that it would make it look like
Signal itself was insecure.
>> Yeah, it would be framed as a problem
with Signal or a problem with privacy
or, you know, that that was a very
volatile, very heightened news cycle.
So, how that would turn out was not
clear. But yes, I mean, this was
ultimately men's thumbs doing things.
That is not something an application
developer can take responsibility
>> for
>> It was, yeah. It It turned out well for
us. We saw growth across the US, across
the world, and we've seen pretty steady
growth since then.
>> Can I ask you, Meredith, how you
reconcile yourself with where your
product is being used by people to do
harm to others, and particularly the
example of child sexual abuse? Am I
right in thinking that if pedophiles,
abusers are using Signal to circulate
images of child sexual abuse,
that can't happen without them fearing
that you will hand over data to law
enforcement?
>> We
go out of our way to not be a social
media company.
So, we could pump our numbers
fairly easily if we added things like
broadcast channels
or features that allowed you to find
people with similar interests, and you
meet strangers on Signal.
But, Signal has made a very
conscientious choice to stay in our
narrow lane as an interpersonal
communications app, which means you have
to encounter the person you're talking
to in some capacity that is not a, you
know, viral find-a-friend feed.
>> Yeah, that's outside the the app,
essentially. But, once you do find that
person, you can be sure that anything
you share with them is free from outside
>> That is Signal's promise. We are open
source. We are, you know, people audit
our code regularly. We have the open
source community looking at our code. We
cannot collect that data. We cannot turn
that data over.
And, you know, look, we limit the
features that allow virality. We limit
the features that allow mass
distribution, and we do that very
conscientiously.
I also need to make a fundamental point
that is, you know, it is
simply true
that encryption either works for
everyone
or it works for no one.
There is no way to have a golden key or
a special back door or access just for
the good guys.
>> And do you have a struggle with that,
knowing that there will be people who
are using it for the most abusive
possible images of children who are on
Signal right now? Like are there moments
where you find that hard
to reconcile or come to terms with
yourself?
>> I
The fact of child sexual abuse is
horrifying to me.
Absolutely. And I think we need to take
that so seriously as a society that
needs to get much, much better with
looking gnarly problems in the face and
actually tackling them.
But I also struggle with the persistent
focus
on privacy as the
purported barrier to solving these
issues
when we have most of the Epstein list
walking around without consequences.
When we have so few mechanisms to
actually help children when they report
a powerful figure in their community,
when we are defunding the actual law
enforcement officers who
take this data, act on this data, move
to prosecute the uncles, the fathers,
the pastors who are perpetrating this
abuse.
>> Can I give you the example in the UK
where many people would think you have
to use every tool in the block, right?
So you have to use the levers you're
pointing to and perhaps you have to use
the levers in tech as well. So the UK
government is moving towards making it
compulsory for tech companies to ensure
that children can't take or share nude
images through their platforms.
Is that workable, do you think? And if
the UK compelled that, what would it
mean for your presence here?
>> Well, I'll start by saying there's never
been more data accessible to law
enforcement than there is now. That were
law enforcement well-funded, were social
services well-funded, they could act on
and often don't, often delay, or often
simply don't have the capacity. So, when
we talk about every tool in the toolbox,
we need to recognize that there are some
tools that are not being picked up and
there are some tools that seem an
obsessive focus of politicians who like
to abstract these very difficult
problems into the technical domain and
pretend there is one technical fix they
can apply to solve a problem that needs
a social solution.
>> of many. What do you think of it? As a
policy proposal?
>> Of mass scanning of
devices that would be age-gated. You
know, we put out a statement, Keir
Starmer announced what seems to be a
fairly hasty proposal to implement uh
nudity scanning as a mandatory feature
on all devices that would be sold or
used in the UK and that you could only
opt out of this nudity scanning if you
provided some sort of verification that
you were above a certain age threshold.
>> Correct.
>> There are very few technical details on
that system. But our position and our
position on the client-side scanning
debate that circled the online safety
bill as well, now act, is that this, you
know, this constitutes very dangerous
mass surveillance. That having a
scanning system on your device that is
going to, you know, purportedly detect
nudity can easily be weaponized by
governments for political speech, for
other content. And that we don't
understand the technical mechanism by
which this would be implemented because
my assumption is there is no
specification for this.
But that, you know, we would be looking
at a system that would likely phone
home. So, that's sending that data to
governments, to tech companies, and
ultimately
comprise a a mass surveillance system
of, you know, permitted speech that
would be implemented across everyone's
device and pose real threats to Signal's
ability to provide the robust privacy
guarantees that militaries, governments,
Ukraine, human rights workers,
journalists, people around the world
rely on often for life or death.
>> With all of the big brains in tech, you
really don't think it's possible to
refine the product in a way that
protects children and does the age
verification and the certain kinds of
images without it having these, you
know, massive repercussions and
implications that you're describing?
>> Well, part of being a big brain in tech,
I think, is really understanding
the nature and the limits of what
technology can do.
And this isn't a question of go think
harder, nerds.
Right? There are real limits to what
tech can and can't do. And I
>> tech's coming up with new things all the
time.
>> Their marketing departments are talking
about it all the time, but, you know, if
you look at the implementation layer,
often what you're looking at is sticky
tape and twine and a handful of legacy
libraries that may or may not be
suitable for purpose, the limits of your
software, the limits of the memory
that's running on your your hardware.
You know, these are fundamental material
limitations,
and there is no technology that has been
shown to do this in a way that is robust
and safe.
>> Yeah, I'm I also just wanted that
whether how sustainable your position
is. I hear what you're saying, but it's
not only the UK government that's really
concerned on this front. The EU also had
temporary legislation, which just ran
out, but it was essentially asking tech
companies to voluntarily scan their
platforms for
>> taken the same position on that.
>> On on that.
This does seem to be the way that
governments are going, and if it is, can
you imagine Signal not being available
in the UK or the EU? Like you threatened
to walk over the
online safety bill as it was then in the
UK.
>> Look,
you know, we don't really do PR, right?
We have a position, and our position is
we would rather exit a market
than undermine the technical guarantees
that people trust
for their privacy.
That doesn't change based on
jurisdiction. It doesn't change based on
year. And that's not something we take
lightly. We're not just like flexing or
being recalcitrant. That is recognizing
that encryption requires the network
effect.
That a backdoor in any market
compromises a door into Signal that
would be weaponized by, you know,
nation-state adversaries. Signal is the
only mass communications platform that
provides the level of privacy that we
provide, and we know that we have
adversaries that are consistently
searching for vulnerabilities in our
code.
>> Who do you mean?
>> Who do we mean? Any government with a
capable intelligence agency is spending
some of that effort looking at Signal.
>> Including your own government
in the US? I'm not I I I'm not I don't
have clearance to know that for sure,
but
>> But I'm just wondering if you mean
Russia, China, or do you mean
governments in the West?
>> We know
It has been represented to us that, you
know, Russia is what we've seen kind of
bounties for the delivery of
vulnerabilities, meaning that, you know,
they'll pay you if you can find a
vulnerability they could exploit that
had been offered by the Russian
government. We have had people with who
who would know this or represent that to
us. But, if you look at
the people who rely on this, heads of
state, government officials, military
strategists,
investigative journalists, people
reporting corruption,
I think we need to just recognize
that yes, you have people who have a
very vested interest
in
infiltrating those networks, in
accessing that communication, in
accessing that data, and will spend
resources doing it. That's the objective
function of an intelligence agency.
And Signal is the only one out there
doing this. So, it would be very
serious. It would be a absolute breach
of our duty of care were we to implement
a backdoor
in Signal were we to undermine that
promise. And we're a nonprofit. We are
not a tech company that is juicing
numbers to IPO and exit. We take this
very seriously.
>> intriguing things about Signal, and I
wondered how hard it makes it because
you have some big donors, but you also
have users who donate to you. So, today,
what are your annual running costs? What
are the costs you have to cover?
>> It's about $50 million a year, 5 0.
>> And you fall short in donations?
>> We're sustaining. Yeah, it's about 70%
large donors, 30% people who use the app
and donate, you know, $5 a month, $20 a
month. We love them. Thank you.
>> Does it feel like a struggle?
>> Um
I would
It's something I think about a lot. One
of the real issues we're working with is
that the economic engine
of the tech industry as it's shaped now,
is surveillance. It's the collection and
monetization of data. That's not
alarmist, that is technically true.
And so, existing within a framework
where all of the pressures for revenue,
for growth, for profit, for IPO
are pointing in the direction of collect
and monetize data,
means that we have to choose a different
model. One where we don't have a VC
saying, "Hey, you're not going to meet
your your quarterly goals. You're not
going to get your series B if you don't
figure out how to monetize." Where we
don't have a board and and shareholders
saying, "Figure out how to carve out
some data collection so you can build an
AI model so you can continue to meet and
exceed market consensus."
>> Yeah. Well, that made me wonder about
the LLMs and ChatGPT and Claude. Like,
what would you like us to be aware of in
privacy terms when we use those? When we
ask questions? When we put prompts into
the into the chats?
>> Well, I mean, flatly, like these are not
your friends. These are not conscious
beings. These are not sentient
interlocutors.
>> They're very useful.
>> Sure. Um, many things are very useful.
>> and you can say you don't want your
chats to be shared.
>> You can say all sorts of things, but
ultimately, the power to determine
whether that happens or not is in the
hands of the entity that is running that
service. And those can be stored, those
can be logged, those can be mined for
more data, those can be tweaked slightly
to calibrate the responses to your
purported preference on behalf of, say,
advertisers. So, you know, maybe there's
a an airline that has paid to advertise
and instead of showing ads, perhaps, and
I'm working with a hypothetical here, we
don't have evidence of this, but this is
very much in the realm of the possible.
You say, "Hey, Chat GPT, find me a very
cheap flight."
And instead of finding you the cheapest
flight, it finds you one with their
preferred advertising partner that is
not cheaper. Do you use them?
I mean, I ask them to format a document
here and there, but no, I have no
relationship with them. I don't ask them
questions. I'm very serious about my
thinking and my writing, and I don't
want
the process of working through an idea,
the struggle of not knowing and then
figuring it out to be foreclosed or
eclipsed by
the response of a system that's kind of
averaging what's already out there.
>> Yeah, I guess that's a different
argument. That's also about safeguarding
your headspace or your or your thinking
time beyond privacy. The next generation
or the next layer of of all these models
is the more autonomous personal
assistant type thing. You know,
Microsoft Copilot. Mustafa Suleyman was
on this program, and he said to me, you
know, by next Christmas, you can be
buying your Christmas presents through
Microsoft Copilot working out what you
need to buy for whom.
What do you think of that kind of
autonomous agent being in people's
lives? What would it mean in privacy
terms?
>> Yeah, I mean, that's a great question,
and let's let's take Mustafa's
little vision of, you know, AI
Christmas. Yeah, we can I can't wait. Um
yeah, um
everyone's getting a gift certificate to
Microsoft Copilot.
>> [laughter]
>> Um but what would what would what would
that mean, right? So, we have a a
Windows laptop that's running Copilot,
and I say, "Hey, Copilot, I
don't want to live my life. I would like
you to live it for me, and I don't
really want to think about the warm
feelings I have for those that I'm
buying gifts for or think about what
they might actually love or you know
engage in that like generous
interpersonal communal feeling that
maybe should be at the heart of
Christmas, who knows, but I don't have
the time for that. I'm going to play
pickleball or whatever the thing I am
doing and I would like you to do that
for me and I would like you to
figure out what gifts to buy. I would
like you to consult with my siblings
group chat and see, you know,
what our family might like. I would like
you to buy those gifts and I would like
you to figure out how to get them to the
right place.
Well,
okay, that would need access to my
credit card.
That would need access to my browser to
pretend it is me to drive through that
browsing history to find those things.
If it's accessing my siblings group
chat, that would need access to my
signal.
I would need the ability to message my
siblings on my behalf.
And then it would need my home address,
say, to ship those gifts.
It would need maybe my calendar to make
sure they get there on time, etc. etc.
So what you've just described
is a system with very very pervasive
access
across multiple applications and
services and importantly in the context
of signal,
it would constitute a kind of a backdoor
into signal. It would be able to access
signal, pull data out of signal.
>> isn't just privacy and access to our
data. It's actually that you think once
something like that ends up on a phone
because we've given it permission to,
it could actually
be a threat to Signal's ethos and
promise.
>> We have described it metaphorically as
breaking the blood-brain barrier between
the operating system
and the application layer.
>> So you can make Signal secure enough to
protect against that?
>> Well, what we are seeing in the case of
these agents are are promises like this,
right? The
access of data at the application layer,
pulling that data into a context window,
but it's sort of a big data slurry that
the agent sort of acts on and and
remembers. And then implementations
architectures for this agent
that are very unsafe from a
cybersecurity perspective.
>> Because the agent is essentially
becoming the person or the agent has
been given the license to be.
>> You you have to
>> be me or well, not you because I'm sure
you would never go down this route, but
>> I try not to. That's That is my
struggle. Um
but you you've given it what in sort of
technical terms like root access to your
life. You've given it the keys to the
kingdom because to act on your behalf,
it needs to be able to do everything you
would do.
>> Do you worry then about this as an
existential threat to Signal? It's
clearly not that easy to run the
foundation.
>> do. I do worry.
>> Cuz it seems quite [clears throat]
likely that it will come to pass just if
you look at how
much bigger these companies are getting
by the day and they're going to need to
make more promises about what they can
offer.
I use the example of Copilot, but there
are others clearly.
>> Yeah. Any one of the operating system
vendors that decides to implement an
agent with these capacities is
ultimately hollowing out the ability for
Signal and others to guarantee privacy
or data protection at the application
layer.
And this is a quiet but profound shift
that we are witnessing.
>> Can you fight it?
>> Oh, I mean I I don't believe in
inevitability and I am willing to fight
on my principles. You know, I don't know
if I can win it, but I will do
everything I can because I think this is
fundamental. I am concerned that we are
seeing extremely hasty decisions
made by very powerful actors. You know,
we have three companies in the world
with control of our core operating
systems. That's Google
with Android, Microsoft with Windows,
and Apple with iOS, macOS.
We all are relying on one or another of
those, and they can make decisions by
fiat that fundamentally harm our
collective cybersecurity.
That take away
any choice we might have for privacy
and that completely hamstring developers
at the application layer who have spent
so much labor, so much money, so much
intention on building different services
that protect or do X, Y, and Z. So, we
are seeing
ironically almost in the name of AI
agents
a move of agency away from the
application layer, away from the user,
away from the consumer who uses these
devices
back into these centralized companies.
>> Give us some advice then, because I
think I I could take away, okay,
wherever you have the option to tick the
box saying to limit the use of your
data, do it. But, I think you're also
telling me
that you don't really trust in the in
what you get back for saying, "Don't use
my data. I don't want it shared." or
>> Well, you know, look, I think we have
evidence that, you know, simply trusting
is
not a sound conclusion. I do come from
maybe an old school where I think you
should verify then trust. What is the
advice? I think healthy skepticism
and a recognition that this technology
is not magic. It can be extremely
useful. It can have profound
applications, particularly where finding
patterns in large amounts of data is
useful for X, Y, Z.
But, it runs on
hardware, it runs on software. When we
talk about AI, we're not talking about a
magical sky god that can suddenly solve
all our problems, answer all our
questions. Um
we are talking about a statistical model
that is then embedded in a hardware
software system using software
libraries, implementing choices on the
user interface level that are made by
people that are susceptible to
vulnerabilities.
>> your own life because Signal for
messaging, what else? What do you What
What is common in the rest of our lives
that you never use and you think we
should Like when you go for a run, do
you put it on Strava?
Do you You would not do that.
>> No, I don't. I mean, I'm not a
I'm not like
the fulcrum of leverage for me is not
individual consumer choice, and I am not
trying to be
a holier-than-thou purist, right? You
know, I have a a tracking app I use for
different health metrics. It's been
helpful for me. I I travel a lot, and
it's been helpful for me seeing that.
>> That's health data.
>> Yeah, that is health data.
>> Yeah.
And I benefit from that. I
think the lever we need to be pushing on
is much more systemic change. I am not
going to opt out of life. I'm not going
to go live in a cabin in the woods and
like pay someone to print out my emails
at the post office in town or whatever
we're talking about, you know, so that I
can feel private, right? Like if we look
even at Signal's privacy promises, we're
not talking about isolation from our
social, economic, political lives,
living in a vacuum of like
holier-than-thou cybersecurity purity.
We're talking about the ability to talk
to other people, to share with them,
right? And so, yeah, I have an
Instagram. I post mainly work events or
whatever on that, right? I use social
media. I have the NTS app. It's a really
good web radio that has great mixes,
right? Like I I listen to that. Maybe
they collect data. You know, I push
reject all, but I don't always trust
that that's actually rejecting cookies.
I
am a person living in 2026 and I want to
participate in the world. What I don't
believe is that participation should be
on the terms of a handful of tech
companies located in the US whose
choices are made based on the desire to
maximize revenue.
>> you, too, are American tech.
>> I The irony abounds. Look at this. A
complex individual I am I am I And I
worked in tech for 20 years. I'm I'm of
the tech industry.
So, those two things are true.
>> But I think you're saying to us,
[laughter] make better choices or just
think more carefully about your choices.
Like even if you get that much from
people, will you consider it valuable or
even a victory?
>> I would say those things and be
skeptical of these claims. You're not
stupid. The choices offered, yes, no, or
maybe maybe aren't the choices you want.
As a dream a little bigger. What do you
want from these companies? What world do
you want to live in?
What world would be the thing you want
to help build?
And then how do you think about
demanding from the people who have
commandeered, who have created, who now
hold so much power over our social and
political and economic institutions via
the tech infrastructures, the
information ecosystem on the tech
platforms, the AI decision-making that
is inoculating so many functions in our
lives.
What do we need from them
to help create that world? Not simply if
I'm given the choice yes or no, which do
I choose and that's the limit of my
ability to enact any change in my life.
But do we want tech in our education
system and how? Yes, we do. Okay, well,
then what does it look like and how do
we work to guarantee that we're actually
using it to shape that better world and
not simply being shaped by decisions
made on a whiteboard in Mountain View by
a handful of product managers who really
have to ship AI this quarter or they're
not going to get promoted.
>> Who you probably know because you once
used to work with them.
>> Yeah, and they're all named Mike.
>> [laughter]
>> Even now? Is it still like that?
>> Even now. Even now. I've heard. I've
heard.
>> You never miss that world? I mean, it's
a very big bucks world for
apart from other things.
>> Am I sad I'm not like rich rich?
>> Yeah?
>> No.
No. Like, [clears throat]
I'm I'm hood rich. I'm happy being hood
rich.
>> What does hood rich mean?
>> It means rich in the context of the
neighborhood you come from, not rich in
the context of complaining about the
champagne on your private flight.
>> And [laughter] your And your hoods are
both New York and Paris, so you
>> Yeah, it's I'm like, don't cry for me.
>> [laughter]
>> Meredith Whittaker, thank you so much.
>> It was great. Thank you.
>> Unknown to me, later that day Meredith
was visiting Downing Street to talk to
Keir Starmer's team about Signal's
concern at their plans. A few other
notes,
>> [music]
>> we asked Meta to comment on her
characterization of its business model
and approach to privacy. A spokesperson
for WhatsApp responded [music]
by saying this, "We also look at privacy
beyond encrypting messages. We don't
keep logs of who everyone is messaging
or calling. [music]
We do not track the messages people are
sending one another for ads. [music] We
do not sell user data."
We approached Google, too, on Meredith's
assessment [music] of their business
model, but we've had no response.
And that AI Christmas thought, the
conversation with Mustafa Suleyman of
Microsoft is in the feed. Just scroll
back to last [music] December to find
it.
>> It is inevitable that machines are going
to be more capable than humans at doing
most work.
>> [music]